README.md, before:

# Managing Agentic Memory with Elasticsearch

## 📖 Overview

A comprehensive solution for managing agentic memory using a dual-memory architecture that combines **short-term memory** (checkpointers) with **long-term memory** (Elasticsearch). This system enables AI agents to maintain context across sessions, intelligently retrieve relevant past conversations, and optimize memory through summarization and context pruning.

### Memory Architecture

- 🧠 **Long-Term Memory (Elasticsearch)**: Persistent storage of conversation history across sessions with semantic search capabilities
- 💾 **Short-Term Memory (Checkpointers)**: In-memory session-based storage using LangGraph's MemorySaver for active conversation context
- 📝 **Conversation Summarization**: Each conversation is automatically summarized before storage to reduce duplication and improve retrieval
- ✂️ **Context Pruning**: Intelligent removal of irrelevant content from retrieved context using Provence reranker for optimal relevance
- 🔍 **Semantic Retrieval**: Advanced similarity search with confidence scoring to find the most relevant past conversations
- ✅ **Relevance Validation**: LLM-based verification ensures retrieved context actually answers the user's query
- 🌐 **Live Web Search**: Optional Tavily integration for accessing current information when long-term memory doesn't have recent data

---

## 🧠 How Memory Management Works

### Short-Term Memory (Checkpointers)

During an active conversation session, the agent uses LangGraph's `MemorySaver` to maintain short-term memory. This in-memory storage:
- Tracks the current conversation flow in real-time
- Maintains context within a single session
- Stores checkpoints that can be persisted to long-term memory when the session ends

### Long-Term Memory (Elasticsearch)

When conversations end, they can be stored in Elasticsearch for persistent long-term memory:

1. **Storage Options**:
   - **Summarized**: The entire conversation is summarized into a single document (recommended for better retrieval)
   - **Individual Messages**: Each message is stored separately with embeddings

2. **Retrieval Process**:
   - Semantic search finds relevant past conversations based on query similarity
   - Confidence scoring determines if retrieved context is sufficient
   - Context pruning removes irrelevant sentences using Provence reranker
   - Summarization reduces duplication in retrieved context
   - Relevance checking validates that context actually answers the query

3. **Optimization Techniques**:
   - **Context Pruning**: Provence reranker filters out irrelevant sentences, keeping only content that directly relates to the query
   - **Context Summarization**: LLM-powered summarization reduces token usage and focuses on key information
   - **Confidence Thresholds**: Configurable similarity scores determine when to use long-term memory vs. live web search

---

## 🚀 Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.8+
- Elasticsearch instance (cloud or local)
- OpenAI API key
- (Optional) Tavily API key for web search

### Environment Variables

Create a `.env` file in the root directory:

```bash
# Required
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
ELASTICSEARCH_URL=https://your-cluster.es.region.cloud.es.io:9243
ELASTICSEARCH_API_KEY=your-api-key-here

# Optional
OPENAI_EMBEDDING_MODEL=text-embedding-3-small  # Default: text-embedding-3-small
TAVILY_API_KEY=tvly-xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx  # For web search
```

### Installation Steps

1. **Create and activate virtual environment:**
   ```bash
   python -m venv my-venv
   source my-venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: my-venv\Scripts\activate
   ```

2. **Install dependencies:**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

3. **Run the agent:**
   ```bash
   python -m elasticsearch_agent.main
   ```

---

## ⚡ Quick Start

Once installed, here's how to get started in 3 steps:

### Step 1: Start the Agent
```bash
python -m elasticsearch_agent.main
```

You'll see:
```
✅ Connected to Elasticsearch
🧠 Elasticsearch long-term memory enabled
🌐 Tavily web search enabled

User:
```

### Step 2: Have Your First Conversation
```
User:
Hi, my name is Sarah and I'm interested in machine learning.

Agent:
Hello Sarah! Nice to meet you. Machine learning is a fascinating field! 
How can I help you today?

User:
What's the weather in New York today?

Agent:
[Agent uses Tavily to get current weather information]

User:
quit
```

### Step 3: Store the Conversation
When you type `quit`, you'll be asked:
```
💾 Do you want to store this conversation to Elasticsearch? (yes/no): yes
📝 How would you like to store the conversation?
  1. Summarize into a single document (recommended for better retrieval)
  2. Store individual messages
  Enter choice (1/2, default=1): 1
✅ Summary indexed successfully!
```

### Step 4: Test Memory in Next Session
Start the agent again and ask about previous conversations:
```
User:
What's my name?

Agent:
Your name is Sarah! We discussed earlier that you're interested in machine learning.
```

**That's it!** The agent now remembers your conversations and can retrieve them in future sessions.

> 💡 **Tip**: Use `--verbose` flag to see detailed processing information:
> ```bash
> python -m elasticsearch_agent.main --verbose
> ```

---

## 🎮 Command-Line Options

| Option | Short | Description | Default |
|--------|-------|-------------|---------|
| `--verbose` | `-v` | Show detailed checkpoint and retrieval information | `False` |
| `--no-tavily` | - | Disable Tavily web search tool | `False` |
| `--pruning-threshold` | - | Pruning threshold for Provence reranker (0.1=conservative, 0.5=aggressive) | `0.3` |
| `--rank-window` | - | Number of candidates to retrieve from Elasticsearch before pruning | `10` |
| `--confidence-threshold` | - | Confidence threshold for Elasticsearch results. If max score >= threshold, use Elasticsearch. Otherwise use Tavily | `0.7` |

### Usage Examples

**Basic usage:**
```bash
python -m elasticsearch_agent.main
```

**Verbose mode:**
```bash
python -m elasticsearch_agent.main --verbose
```

**Custom thresholds:**
```bash
python -m elasticsearch_agent.main \
  --verbose \
  --pruning-threshold 0.3 \
  --rank-window 10 \
  --confidence-threshold 0.7
```

**Without Tavily (long-term memory only):**
```bash
python -m elasticsearch_agent.main --no-tavily
```

---

## 💬 Example Conversations

### Example 1: First Conversation (No Memory Yet)

When you first run the agent, it won't have any stored memories, so it will use Tavily for web search:

```
User:
Hi, my name is Alice and I'm a software engineer.

Agent:
Hello Alice! Nice to meet you. It's great to know you're a software engineer. 
How can I assist you today with your work or anything else you'd like to discuss?

User:
What's the weather in San Francisco today?

Agent:
Today in San Francisco, the weather is expected to be partly cloudy with:
- Maximum Temperature: Approximately 18°C
- Minimum Temperature: Around 12°C
- Condition: Partly Cloudy
- Wind: 15 kph from the west

User:
quit

Agent:
Have a nice day! 👋

💾 Do you want to store this conversation to Elasticsearch? (yes/no): yes
📝 How would you like to store the conversation?
  1. Summarize into a single document (recommended for better retrieval)
  2. Store individual messages
  Enter choice (1/2, default=1): 1
✅ Summary indexed successfully!
```

### Example 2: Using Stored Memory

After storing conversations, the agent can retrieve and use previous context:

```
User:
What's my name?

Agent:
Your name is Alice! We discussed earlier that you're a software engineer.

User:
What did we talk about earlier?

Agent:
Earlier in our conversation, we discussed:
- You introduced yourself as Alice, a software engineer
- We checked the weather in San Francisco, which was partly cloudy with temperatures around 12-18°C

Is there anything else you'd like to know?
```

### Example 3: Current Information (Tavily Fallback)

For questions about current events or real-time data, the agent uses Tavily:

```
User:
What are the latest developments in AI this week?

Agent:
[The agent uses Tavily to search for recent AI news and provides current information]

User:
What's the current stock price of Apple?

Agent:
[The agent uses Tavily to get real-time stock information]
```

### Example 4: Memory + Current Information

The agent intelligently combines stored memory with current information:

```
User:
What's the weather in San Francisco today? And remind me what we discussed yesterday.

Agent:
Today in San Francisco, the weather is [current weather from Tavily].

Regarding our previous conversation, we discussed [retrieved from Elasticsearch memory]:
- You introduced yourself as Alice, a software engineer
- We checked the weather in San Francisco previously
```

### Example 5: Verbose Mode

Run with `--verbose` to see detailed processing:

```bash
python -m elasticsearch_agent.main --verbose
```

```
User:
What's my favorite programming language?

🔍 Checking Elasticsearch first...
📝 Pruning context with Provence reranker...
📝 Summarizing context to reduce duplication...
✅ Using Elasticsearch results (similarity: 0.8523, relevance check passed)
🤖 Generating answer from Elasticsearch context...

Agent:
Based on our previous conversation, you mentioned that Python is your favorite programming language!
```

### Quick Start Guide

1. **First Run**: Start a conversation and introduce yourself
   ```
   User: Hi, I'm Bob and I love machine learning.
   ```

2. **Store the Conversation**: When done, type `quit` and choose to store the conversation
   ```
   User: quit
   💾 Do you want to store this conversation to Elasticsearch? (yes/no): yes
   ```

3. **Second Run**: Start a new session and ask about previous conversations
   ```
   User: What's my name?
   Agent: Your name is Bob!
   ```

4. **Try Current Information**: Ask about recent events or real-time data
   ```
   User: What's the latest news about Python 3.13?
   ```

5. **Combine Both**: The agent automatically uses memory when available, and Tavily for current info
   ```
   User: What did we talk about? And what's the weather today?
   ```

---

## 📊 Memory Management Flow

### During Conversation (Short-Term Memory)

1. **Active Session**: User interacts with the agent
2. **Checkpoint Storage**: Each interaction is stored in short-term memory (checkpointers)
3. **Context Maintenance**: Agent maintains conversation context within the session
4. **Real-Time Access**: Current conversation history is immediately available

### Retrieving Past Conversations (Long-Term Memory)

1. **Query Processing**: User asks a question
2. **Semantic Search**: System searches Elasticsearch for semantically similar past conversations
3. **Confidence Scoring**: Similarity scores determine relevance (default threshold: 0.7)
4. **Context Pruning**: Provence reranker removes irrelevant sentences, keeping only query-relevant content
5. **Context Summarization**: LLM summarizes retrieved context to reduce duplication and token usage
6. **Relevance Validation**: LLM verifies that the retrieved context actually answers the query
7. **Answer Generation**: If validation passes, answer is generated using the optimized context
8. **Fallback to Web Search**: If long-term memory doesn't have sufficient information, Tavily provides current data

### Storing Conversations (Long-Term Memory Persistence)

When a conversation session ends:
1. **User Choice**: User decides whether to store the conversation to Elasticsearch
2. **Storage Mode Selection**:
   - **Summarized** (Recommended): Entire conversation is summarized into a single document for better retrieval
   - **Individual Messages**: Each message stored separately with embeddings
3. **Embedding Generation**: Vector embeddings are created for semantic search
4. **Indexing**: Documents are indexed to Elasticsearch for future retrieval across sessions

---

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**1. Import Errors**
```
ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'elasticsearch_agent'
```
**Solution**: Ensure you're running from the repository root directory where `elasticsearch_agent/` is located, or ensure `elasticsearch_agent` is in your Python path.

**2. Elasticsearch Connection Errors**
```
ConnectionError: Failed to connect to Elasticsearch
```
**Solution**: Check your `ELASTICSEARCH_URL` and `ELASTICSEARCH_API_KEY` in `.env`.

**3. Provence Model Loading Fails**
```
⚠️  Provence reranker not available
```
**Solution**: This is non-critical. The system will continue without pruning. Ensure `transformers` and `nltk` are installed.

---

## 📋 TODO / Roadmap

### ✅ Completed Features

- [x] **Context Pruning**: Implemented Provence reranker for removing irrelevant content from retrieved context
- [x] **Context Summarization**: LLM-powered summarization to reduce duplication and focus on relevant information
- [x] **Elasticsearch Long-Term Storage**: Persistent memory storage using Elasticsearch for conversation history across sessions
- [x] **Checkpointers for Short-Term Storage**: In-memory checkpoint storage using LangGraph's MemorySaver for session-based memory
- [x] **Tavily Integration**: Live web search integration for accessing current information and real-time data
- [x] **Relevance Checking**: LLM-based validation to ensure retrieved context actually answers the query
- [x] **Confidence Scoring**: Similarity-based scoring system to determine when to use Elasticsearch vs Tavily

### 🚧 Pending Work

- [ ] **Subagent Architecture**: Implement subagent system with specialized agents for different tasks
  - [ ] Memory Agent: Dedicated agent for Elasticsearch long-term memory operations
  - [ ] Research Agent: Specialized agent for Tavily web search operations
  - [ ] Supervisor Router: LLM-based routing system to direct queries to appropriate subagents
  - [ ] Context Isolation: Separate thread contexts for each subagent to prevent context contamination

---

## 📄 License

Licensed under the Apache License 2.0. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

## 📚 Additional Resources

- [LangGraph Documentation](https://langchain-ai.github.io/langgraph/)
- [Elasticsearch Documentation](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/index.html)
- [Provence Reranker](https://huggingface.co/naver/provence-reranker-debertav3-v1)

---

**Version**: 1.0.0

Commit message:

Split requirements into base and ML-CPU files, remove old requirements.txt

README.md, after:

# Managing Agentic Memory with Elasticsearch

## 📖 Overview

A comprehensive solution for managing agentic memory using a dual-memory architecture that combines **short-term memory** (checkpointers) with **long-term memory** (Elasticsearch). This system enables AI agents to maintain context across sessions, intelligently retrieve relevant past conversations, and optimize memory through summarization and context pruning.

### Memory Architecture

- 🧠 **Long-Term Memory (Elasticsearch)**: Persistent storage of conversation history across sessions with semantic search capabilities
- 💾 **Short-Term Memory (Checkpointers)**: In-memory session-based storage using LangGraph's MemorySaver for active conversation context
- 📝 **Conversation Summarization**: Each conversation is automatically summarized before storage to reduce duplication and improve retrieval
- ✂️ **Context Pruning**: Intelligent removal of irrelevant content from retrieved context using Provence reranker for optimal relevance
- 🔍 **Semantic Retrieval**: Advanced similarity search with confidence scoring to find the most relevant past conversations
- ✅ **Relevance Validation**: LLM-based verification ensures retrieved context actually answers the user's query
- 🌐 **Live Web Search**: Optional Tavily integration for accessing current information when long-term memory doesn't have recent data

---

## 🧠 How Memory Management Works

### Short-Term Memory (Checkpointers)

During an active conversation session, the agent uses LangGraph's `MemorySaver` to maintain short-term memory. This in-memory storage:
- Tracks the current conversation flow in real-time
- Maintains context within a single session
- Stores checkpoints that can be persisted to long-term memory when the session ends

### Long-Term Memory (Elasticsearch)

When conversations end, they can be stored in Elasticsearch for persistent long-term memory:

1. **Storage Options**:
   - **Summarized**: The entire conversation is summarized into a single document (recommended for better retrieval)
   - **Individual Messages**: Each message is stored separately with embeddings

2. **Retrieval Process**:
   - Semantic search finds relevant past conversations based on query similarity
   - Confidence scoring determines if retrieved context is sufficient
   - Context pruning removes irrelevant sentences using Provence reranker
   - Summarization reduces duplication in retrieved context
   - Relevance checking validates that context actually answers the query

3. **Optimization Techniques**:
   - **Context Pruning**: Provence reranker filters out irrelevant sentences, keeping only content that directly relates to the query
   - **Context Summarization**: LLM-powered summarization reduces token usage and focuses on key information
   - **Confidence Thresholds**: Configurable similarity scores determine when to use long-term memory vs. live web search

---

## 🚀 Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.8+
- Elasticsearch instance (cloud or local)
- OpenAI API key
- (Optional) Tavily API key for web search

### Environment Variables

Create a `.env` file in the root directory:

```bash
# Required
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
ELASTICSEARCH_URL=https://your-cluster.es.region.cloud.es.io:9243
ELASTICSEARCH_API_KEY=your-api-key-here

# Optional
OPENAI_EMBEDDING_MODEL=text-embedding-3-small  # Default: text-embedding-3-small
TAVILY_API_KEY=tvly-xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx  # For web search
```

### Installation Steps

1. **Create and activate virtual environment:**
   ```bash
   python -m venv my-venv
   source my-venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: my-venv\Scripts\activate
   ```

2. **Install base dependencies (required):**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements-base.txt
   ```

3. **Install ML dependencies (optional, only if you need Provence reranker for context pruning):**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements-ml-cpu.txt
   ```
   
   > **Note**: The ML packages (torch, transformers) are only needed for the Provence reranker feature. If you don't need context pruning, you can skip this step. The system will work without it, but context pruning will be disabled.

4. **Run the agent:**
   ```bash
   python -m elasticsearch_agent.main
   ```

### Installation Options

**Minimal Installation** (without context pruning):
```bash
pip install -r requirements-base.txt
```
This installs all core functionality except the Provence reranker. The agent will work normally but context pruning will be disabled.

**Full Installation** (with context pruning):
```bash
pip install -r requirements-base.txt
pip install -r requirements-ml-cpu.txt
```
This includes CPU-only versions of PyTorch and Transformers for the Provence reranker. Much smaller than GPU versions (~500MB vs ~2GB+).

---

## ⚡ Quick Start

Once installed, here's how to get started in 3 steps:

### Step 1: Start the Agent
```bash
python -m elasticsearch_agent.main
```

You'll see:
```
✅ Connected to Elasticsearch
🧠 Elasticsearch long-term memory enabled
🌐 Tavily web search enabled

User:
```

### Step 2: Have Your First Conversation
```
User:
Hi, my name is Sarah and I'm interested in machine learning.

Agent:
Hello Sarah! Nice to meet you. Machine learning is a fascinating field! 
How can I help you today?

User:
What's the weather in New York today?

Agent:
[Agent uses Tavily to get current weather information]

User:
quit
```

### Step 3: Store the Conversation
When you type `quit`, you'll be asked:
```
💾 Do you want to store this conversation to Elasticsearch? (yes/no): yes
📝 How would you like to store the conversation?
  1. Summarize into a single document (recommended for better retrieval)
  2. Store individual messages
  Enter choice (1/2, default=1): 1
✅ Summary indexed successfully!
```

### Step 4: Test Memory in Next Session
Start the agent again and ask about previous conversations:
```
User:
What's my name?

Agent:
Your name is Sarah! We discussed earlier that you're interested in machine learning.
```

**That's it!** The agent now remembers your conversations and can retrieve them in future sessions.

> 💡 **Tip**: Use `--verbose` flag to see detailed processing information:
> ```bash
> python -m elasticsearch_agent.main --verbose
> ```

---

## 🎮 Command-Line Options

| Option | Short | Description | Default |
|--------|-------|-------------|---------|
| `--verbose` | `-v` | Show detailed checkpoint and retrieval information | `False` |
| `--no-tavily` | - | Disable Tavily web search tool | `False` |
| `--pruning-threshold` | - | Pruning threshold for Provence reranker (0.1=conservative, 0.5=aggressive) | `0.3` |
| `--rank-window` | - | Number of candidates to retrieve from Elasticsearch before pruning | `10` |
| `--confidence-threshold` | - | Confidence threshold for Elasticsearch results. If max score >= threshold, use Elasticsearch. Otherwise use Tavily | `0.7` |

### Usage Examples

**Basic usage:**
```bash
python -m elasticsearch_agent.main
```

**Verbose mode:**
```bash
python -m elasticsearch_agent.main --verbose
```

**Custom thresholds:**
```bash
python -m elasticsearch_agent.main \
  --verbose \
  --pruning-threshold 0.3 \
  --rank-window 10 \
  --confidence-threshold 0.7
```

**Without Tavily (long-term memory only):**
```bash
python -m elasticsearch_agent.main --no-tavily
```

---

## 💬 Example Conversations

### Example 1: First Conversation (No Memory Yet)

When you first run the agent, it won't have any stored memories, so it will use Tavily for web search:

```
User:
Hi, my name is Alice and I'm a software engineer.

Agent:
Hello Alice! Nice to meet you. It's great to know you're a software engineer. 
How can I assist you today with your work or anything else you'd like to discuss?

User:
What's the weather in San Francisco today?

Agent:
Today in San Francisco, the weather is expected to be partly cloudy with:
- Maximum Temperature: Approximately 18°C
- Minimum Temperature: Around 12°C
- Condition: Partly Cloudy
- Wind: 15 kph from the west

User:
quit

Agent:
Have a nice day! 👋

💾 Do you want to store this conversation to Elasticsearch? (yes/no): yes
📝 How would you like to store the conversation?
  1. Summarize into a single document (recommended for better retrieval)
  2. Store individual messages
  Enter choice (1/2, default=1): 1
✅ Summary indexed successfully!
```

### Example 2: Using Stored Memory

After storing conversations, the agent can retrieve and use previous context:

```
User:
What's my name?

Agent:
Your name is Alice! We discussed earlier that you're a software engineer.

User:
What did we talk about earlier?

Agent:
Earlier in our conversation, we discussed:
- You introduced yourself as Alice, a software engineer
- We checked the weather in San Francisco, which was partly cloudy with temperatures around 12-18°C

Is there anything else you'd like to know?
```

### Example 3: Current Information (Tavily Fallback)

For questions about current events or real-time data, the agent uses Tavily:

```
User:
What are the latest developments in AI this week?

Agent:
[The agent uses Tavily to search for recent AI news and provides current information]

User:
What's the current stock price of Apple?

Agent:
[The agent uses Tavily to get real-time stock information]
```

### Example 4: Memory + Current Information

The agent intelligently combines stored memory with current information:

```
User:
What's the weather in San Francisco today? And remind me what we discussed yesterday.

Agent:
Today in San Francisco, the weather is [current weather from Tavily].

Regarding our previous conversation, we discussed [retrieved from Elasticsearch memory]:
- You introduced yourself as Alice, a software engineer
- We checked the weather in San Francisco previously
```

### Example 5: Verbose Mode

Run with `--verbose` to see detailed processing:

```bash
python -m elasticsearch_agent.main --verbose
```

```
User:
What's my favorite programming language?

🔍 Checking Elasticsearch first...
📝 Pruning context with Provence reranker...
📝 Summarizing context to reduce duplication...
✅ Using Elasticsearch results (similarity: 0.8523, relevance check passed)
🤖 Generating answer from Elasticsearch context...

Agent:
Based on our previous conversation, you mentioned that Python is your favorite programming language!
```

### Quick Start Guide

1. **First Run**: Start a conversation and introduce yourself
   ```
   User: Hi, I'm Bob and I love machine learning.
   ```

2. **Store the Conversation**: When done, type `quit` and choose to store the conversation
   ```
   User: quit
   💾 Do you want to store this conversation to Elasticsearch? (yes/no): yes
   ```

3. **Second Run**: Start a new session and ask about previous conversations
   ```
   User: What's my name?
   Agent: Your name is Bob!
   ```

4. **Try Current Information**: Ask about recent events or real-time data
   ```
   User: What's the latest news about Python 3.13?
   ```

5. **Combine Both**: The agent automatically uses memory when available, and Tavily for current info
   ```
   User: What did we talk about? And what's the weather today?
   ```

---

## 📊 Memory Management Flow

### During Conversation (Short-Term Memory)

1. **Active Session**: User interacts with the agent
2. **Checkpoint Storage**: Each interaction is stored in short-term memory (checkpointers)
3. **Context Maintenance**: Agent maintains conversation context within the session
4. **Real-Time Access**: Current conversation history is immediately available

### Retrieving Past Conversations (Long-Term Memory)

1. **Query Processing**: User asks a question
2. **Semantic Search**: System searches Elasticsearch for semantically similar past conversations
3. **Confidence Scoring**: Similarity scores determine relevance (default threshold: 0.7)
4. **Context Pruning**: Provence reranker removes irrelevant sentences, keeping only query-relevant content
5. **Context Summarization**: LLM summarizes retrieved context to reduce duplication and token usage
6. **Relevance Validation**: LLM verifies that the retrieved context actually answers the query
7. **Answer Generation**: If validation passes, answer is generated using the optimized context
8. **Fallback to Web Search**: If long-term memory doesn't have sufficient information, Tavily provides current data

### Storing Conversations (Long-Term Memory Persistence)

When a conversation session ends:
1. **User Choice**: User decides whether to store the conversation to Elasticsearch
2. **Storage Mode Selection**:
   - **Summarized** (Recommended): Entire conversation is summarized into a single document for better retrieval
   - **Individual Messages**: Each message stored separately with embeddings
3. **Embedding Generation**: Vector embeddings are created for semantic search
4. **Indexing**: Documents are indexed to Elasticsearch for future retrieval across sessions

---

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**1. Import Errors**
```
ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'elasticsearch_agent'
```
**Solution**: Ensure you're running from the repository root directory where `elasticsearch_agent/` is located, or ensure `elasticsearch_agent` is in your Python path.

**2. Elasticsearch Connection Errors**
```
ConnectionError: Failed to connect to Elasticsearch
```
**Solution**: Check your `ELASTICSEARCH_URL` and `ELASTICSEARCH_API_KEY` in `.env`.

**3. Provence Model Loading Fails**
```
⚠️  Provence reranker not available
```
**Solution**: This is non-critical. The system will continue without context pruning. To enable context pruning:
- Install ML dependencies: `pip install -r requirements-ml-cpu.txt`
- Ensure `transformers` and `nltk` are installed
- The agent works perfectly fine without context pruning - it's an optional optimization feature

---

## 📋 TODO / Roadmap

### ✅ Completed Features

- [x] **Context Pruning**: Implemented Provence reranker for removing irrelevant content from retrieved context
- [x] **Context Summarization**: LLM-powered summarization to reduce duplication and focus on relevant information
- [x] **Elasticsearch Long-Term Storage**: Persistent memory storage using Elasticsearch for conversation history across sessions
- [x] **Checkpointers for Short-Term Storage**: In-memory checkpoint storage using LangGraph's MemorySaver for session-based memory
- [x] **Tavily Integration**: Live web search integration for accessing current information and real-time data
- [x] **Relevance Checking**: LLM-based validation to ensure retrieved context actually answers the query
- [x] **Confidence Scoring**: Similarity-based scoring system to determine when to use Elasticsearch vs Tavily

### 🚧 Pending Work

- [ ] **Subagent Architecture**: Implement subagent system with specialized agents for different tasks
  - [ ] Memory Agent: Dedicated agent for Elasticsearch long-term memory operations
  - [ ] Research Agent: Specialized agent for Tavily web search operations
  - [ ] Supervisor Router: LLM-based routing system to direct queries to appropriate subagents
  - [ ] Context Isolation: Separate thread contexts for each subagent to prevent context contamination

---

## 📄 License

Licensed under the Apache License 2.0. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

## 📚 Additional Resources

- [LangGraph Documentation](https://langchain-ai.github.io/langgraph/)
- [Elasticsearch Documentation](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/index.html)
- [Provence Reranker](https://huggingface.co/naver/provence-reranker-debertav3-v1)

---

**Version**: 1.0.0
